### 1 | Abstract

The desert night lizard (Xantusia vigilis) is a specialist abundantly spread across arid regions of the North American southwest, often reliant on Joshua tree branches (Yucca brevifolia) as microhabitats. Predictions of range restriction for Y. brevifolia may therefore be of particular concern for the night lizard’s ecological conservation. Here, we explored climate change impacts on X. vigilis’ geographical distribution by associating species presences to an underlying bioclimatic niche, aiming to relate these responses to those for Y. brevifolia’s range. We employed sets of decorrelated bioclimatic variables (1970-2000 baseline) with sets of presence locations for each species (~1000 unique locations). Three classifiers were selected from a set of over twenty candidates (including Maxent) and blended via soft voting to obtain a regionally accurate current distribution. Future climate conditions were simulated across eight climate models (CMIP6), four SSP scenarios, and three time periods per species. Across these scenarios, the suitable habitat for X. vigilis declines between ~51% to ~9% of its current range, assuming negligible dispersal, akin to the range restrictions for Y. brevifolia, between ~49% to ~9%. Our results highlight the importance of including symbiotic and other ecologically important species into models of climate change effects on geographic distributions, with conservation risks likely heightened for the patchwork of areas which face extreme climate events, such as wildfires.

### 2 | Methods

Data processing and spatial analyses were performed in the R statistical environment (v. 4.0.3; R Core Team, 2020) with the Raster (v. 3.3-13; Hijmans et al., 2012), Geospatial Data Abstraction Library (“rgdal”; v. 1.5-18; Bivand, Keitt, & Rowlingson, 2019), and Spatial Points packages (“sp”; Pebesma & Bivand., 2005). 	Modeling was conducted with the Python programming language (v. 3.7.6) with the SciKit-Learn (v. 0.23.2;  Pedregosa et al., 2011) and PyImpute libraries (v. 0.2 ; Perry, 2015), with the dismo package in R (v. 1.1-4 ; Hijmans, 2017), and with the Maxent software (v. 3.4.1; Phillips et al., 2006; Phillips & Dudik, 2008). 
				
### 2.1 | Species Presence Data
Occurrence records for X. vigilis and Y. brevifolia were obtained from the publicly available Global Biodiversity Information Facility database (GBIF) (www.gbif.org, downloaded November 1, 2020) and from previous literature (X.v.: Leavitt et al., 2007). We processed the presences to remove duplicates and erroneous (belonging to a different subspecies) coordinates. We randomly sampled coordinates to remove spatial bias among the data (grid sampling). Grid sampling reduced the Y. brevifolia presences by ~65 %, and the X. vigilis presences by ~25%. To preserve the densities of locations which unbiasedly indicate highly suitable habitat for the species, we kept at most two presences per raster pixel (final sets of X.v. = 907; Y.b. = 1325). 

### 2.2 | Bioclimatic Data
We used nineteen bioclimatic (BIO) variables at ~4 km resolution (2.5 arc-minutes) using the end of the 20th century for the baseline climate (1970-2000). This data was downloaded from the publicly available WorldClim database (www.worldclim.org; v. 2.1, Fick & Hijmans, 2017). The features contain ecologically meaningful axes for describing climatic niche, perhaps why they are commonly used for SDMs. We first set the spatial extent for the study space to include all of the latitudinal and longitudinal geographic range for X. vigilis (Leavitt et al., 2007, Bezy et al. 2020) and for Y. brevifolia (Cole et al., 2011, x), minimizing SDM extrapolation bias to future climates (Forester et al., 2013). We randomly sampled background points (the same number as species presences, extent factor of 1.1), confirming that only spatially unbiased coordinates are taken (ie. grid sampled), as per the recommendations in Barbet-Massin et al. (2010). 

### 2.3 | Species Distribution Modeling
Covariate data contained a binary label of presence versus background class, as well as the corresponding nineteen BIO features. We removed the most correlated pairs of variables across species presences, taking a final set with a Spearman’s correlation matrix threshold of 0.85 (x, Dormann et al., 2013), using Maxent jackknife importance scores as the variable rankings (Table S). The remaining data was then split into training (80%) and validation (20%) sets, an assessment of model stability and sensitivity to initial conditions aiming to minimize bias and variance error. We then took three well-parametrized classifiers per species, trained via 10-fold Cross Validation, based on their F statistic of the validation set (X. vigilis: {Extremely Randomized Trees, Light Gradient Boosting Machine, and Catboost Gradient Boosting}; Y. brevifolia: {Catboost Gradient Boosting, Random Forest , Extreme Gradient Boosting}). The models were chosen from a set of over twenty candidates, which included Maxent (with default 10,000 background points) and logistic regression. 

An ensemble classifier for each species was then blended via soft voting, assigning labels to the class with the highest weighted sum of probabilistic model predictions. Soft voting among well-fit classifiers perhaps boosts SDM extrapolation to unseen data, such as to future climates. The resulting baseline climate distributions exhibit strong validation metrics (X.v.  AUC = 0.956, Y.b. AUC = 0.949) (Figure S1), as well as consistency among data partitions during training (Table S). We used 100% of the covariate data for the final model predictions, capturing the entire underlying niche envelope and definitively preserving smaller subgroups of presences (e.g. X. vigilis Pinnacles clade) (Araujo et al., 2005). The resulting predictions for the end of 20th century climate (Figure 1) closely match other estimates of species distribution (e.g. X.v.: Bezy et al., 2020; Y.b.: Cole et al., 2011).
